What is Data ?
Data is collection of raw, unothorized facts and details like text, figure, symbols, observation and descriptions of things etc.
In other words, data does not carry any specific purpose and has no significance by itself.

Morover, data is measured in terms of bits/ bytes- which is basic unit of measurement in terms of computer storage and processing.
Data can be recorded and does not have meaning unless processed.

Types of Data
	1. Quantative
	2. Qualitative

What is information ?
a. Information is organised, processed and structured data.
b. It provide context of data and enable decision making.
c. Processed data that make sense.
d. Information is extracted from the data, analyze and intrupting the peice of data.
e. E.g. you have data of all the people live in your locality, its data after analyze and intercepting the and come to conclusion.
	i. There are 100 senior citizen.
	ii. The sex ratio is 1.1.
	iii. There are 100 new born babies
		That is called information.


Difference between data and information ?
a. Data is collection of fact while information put those facts into context.
b. While data is raw and unorganized, information is organized.
c. Data points are individual and sometimes unrelated. Information map the data to provide big picture view of how it all fit togethre.
d. Data, on its meaningless. When it analyzed and interpreted it become meaningful information.
e. Data does not depend on information however information depend on data.
f. Data typically comes in form of graph, number, symbol, figure whereas information typically comes in form of ideas, thoughts, stories, words.
g. Data is not sufficient for design making but you make decision based on information.


What is Database ?
a. Database is a electronic place/system where data can be accessed easily, managed and updated.
b. To make real use of Data, we need Database Management System.
                                                 

What is DBMS ?
a. A database Management System is a collection of interrelated data and set of program to access those data. The collection of data, usually referred to as the database contains information related to eterprises. The primary goal of DBMS is to provide a way to store and retrive database information in efficient and conveninent.
b. A DBMS is a database itself, along with all the software and functionlity. It is used to perform different operations like addition, access , uploading and deletion of data.

File Processing System has major disadvantage over DBMS.
a) Data redundancy and inconsistency.
b) Difficult in accesing the data.
c) Data isolation.
d) Atomic Problem
e) Integrity problems
f) Concurrent accessing anamolies
g) Security Problem

		DBMS Architecture
1. View of Data (Three Schema Architecture)
a. The major purpose of DBMS is to provide user with a abstract view. That is the system hide the certain details of how the data is store and maintained.
b. To simplify user interaction with system, abstraction is applied in several level of intraction.
c. The main objective of three level architecture is to enable multiple user access the same data with personalized view while storing the underlying data once.
d. Physical Level/ Internal Level
	i. It is lowest level of abstraction describes how the data is stored.
	ii. Low level of Data Structrue is used.
	iii. It has the phyiscal schema which describes physical storage structure of DB.
	iv. Talk about: Storage allocation, data compression & encryption etc.
	v. Goal : We must define algorithm that allow efficient access to data.
e. Logical Level/ Conceptual Level
	i. The conceptual schema describe the design of databse at conceptual level, describe what the data is store in DB and relationship exists among those data.
	ii. User at logical level abstraction does not need aware about phyiscal level structure.
	iii. DBA, who must decide what the data kept in DB use logical level of abstraction.
	iv. Goal : Ease to use
f. View Level/ External Level
	i. Highest level of abstraction aims to simplify user interaction with system by providing different view to different end user.
	ii. Each view schema describe the database part of the particualr group user interested and hides the remaing data from that user group.
	iii. At external level, a database contain several schema that sometimes called sub schema. Subschema describe the different views of database
	iv. At view also provide security mechanism to pervent user to access certain parts of DB.

2. Instance and Schema
a. The collection of information stored in DB at a particular moment is called instance of schema.
b. Overall design of the DB is called schema.
c. The schema is structural discription of data. The schema doesn't change frequently. Data may be change frequently.
d. DB Schema corresponds to variable declaration in program.
e. We have 3 types of schema : Physical Schema, Logical Schema and several View schema called sub schema.
f. Logical schema is most important schema in terms of effect on application program. As a programmer construct app by logical schema.
g. Phyiscal data independence, phyiscal schema change does not affect on logical schema/application program.

3. Data Models
a. Provide a way to describe the design of DB at logical level.
b. Underlying the structur of DB is the data model, collection of conceptual tools for describing the data, data relationship, data semantics & consistency constraits.
c. Example. Er Models, Relational Model, Object- Oriented Models, Object relational models etc.

4. Database Language
a. Data Definition Language (DDL) specify the database schema.
b. Data Manipulation Language (DML) to express database query and updates.
c. Practically, both language features are available in single DB Language such as SQL.
d. DDL 
	i. We specify consistency constrant, we must checked every time DB is updated.
e. DML
  i. Data Manipulation involves
	a. Retrival of information stored in DB.
	b. Deletion of information from the DB.
	c. Insertion of new information into the DB.
	d. Updating the existed information stored in DB.
  ii. Query langauge, a part of DB specify statement requesting the retrival of information.

5. How Database Accessed from the Application.
a. Application (written in host language) interact with DB.
b. Eg. Banking System Module generating payroll access DB by executing the DDL statement from Host Language.
c. API is provided to send DML/DDL statements to DB and retrive the results.
	i. Open Database Connectivity, ODBC, Microsoft.
	ii. Java Database Connectivity, JDBC, Java.

